---
title: "NeoForge 20.3 for Minecraft 1.20.3"
date: 2023-11-30T19:50:00+01:00 # TODO: update time
categories:
- News
author: neoforgedteam
summary: |
    All you need to know about NeoForge 20.3, now released for Minecraft 1.20.3.
description: |
    All you need to know about NeoForge 20.3, now released for Minecraft 1.20.3.
---

The first beta release of NeoForge for Minecraft 1.20.3, NeoForge 20.3.TODO-beta is now released! <!-- TODO update version (you can never be sure that it will be .1 :D) -->
Please try it out, play with it, develop with it, and give us feedback!
**We are not stable yet**, so expect a few breaking changes in the coming weeks.

For players, you can grab the latest installer directly from https://neoforged.net/.

The rest of this blog post is for modders.
Let's talk about recent updates to NeoForge that modders porting to 20.3 should be aware of.
Minecraft 1.20.3 itself also comes with a few technical changes, however that will not be covered in this post.

****

## Capability rework
The most impactful change in 20.3 is the rework of the capability system.
You can read all about it in [our dedicated blog post](../20.3capability-rework/).

## Noteworthy recent additions
Let's discuss a few changes that are already available in the 20.2 release series,
and of course in all 20.3 releases,
but you might not have heard about.

### Access transformers inside `mods.toml`
Mods can now ship multiple access transformer files, by declaring them in their `mods.toml`:
```toml
[[accessTransformers]]
file="modid_base.at"

[[accessTransformers]]
file="modid_extra.at"
```
If no such entry is present, FML will fall back to `META-INF/accesstransformer.cfg` like before.
We will continue to accept both formats for the foreseeable future.

Additionally, ATs still need to be specified for NeoGradle to apply them in your development environments:
```groovy
minecraft {
    accessTransformers {
        file('src/main/resources/modid_base.cfg')
        file('src/main/resources/modid_extra.cfg')
    }
}
```

### MixinExtras ships with NeoForge
MixinExtras by LlamaLad7 now ships with NeoForge and is enabled automatically. There is nothing required in your build.gradle with regards to MixinExtras anymore.

MixinExtras is a completary library to Mixin, designed to help modders write their Mixins in a more expressive and compatible way.
If you use mixins in your mod, we encourage you to give the [MixinExtras wiki](https://github.com/LlamaLad7/MixinExtras/wiki) a read.

If you want to override the bundled MixinExtras version with a newer one, you can do so by JiJing the newer version the same way you used to JiJ regular MixinExtras before this update.

### Mixin configs inside `mods.toml`
Mixin configs can now be specified directly inside your `mods.toml` file, for example:
```toml
[[mixins]]
config="modid_base.mixins.json"

[[mixins]]
config="modid_extra.mixins.json"
```

We recommend using this new format in your mods.
No Gradle support is needed anymore to use Mixins,
and this opens the door to selectively-enabled mixin configs in the future.

## Coming Soon
Before we can stabilize 20.3,
we will be releasing an overhaul of our networking hooks and protocol to account for the configuration phase recently introduced by Mojang.
If you are interested in the discussion, we encourage you to join our Discord server and look at the `#brainstorming` forum channel.

As usual, we also welcome all kinds of smaller contributions.
The breaking change window for 20.3 will remain open for a few weeks.
Now is a great time to start working on your Pull Requests.

## 1.20.2 Plans
NeoForge for 1.20.2 is now stable, starting from version `20.2.86` released a few days ago.
Due to limited community adoption,
we will only accept backports for critical bugfixes,
provided that they are first submitted to and accepted for the 1.20.3 branch.

