---
title: "NeoForge 21.2 for Minecraft 1.21.2"
date: 2024-10-22T18:30:00+02:00
draft: false
categories:
- News
- Releases
author: neoforgedteam
summary: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.2, now released for Minecraft 1.21.2."
description: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.2, now released for Minecraft 1.21.2."
---

Update time, once again! Mojang has just released Minecraft version 1.21.2.

The first beta release of NeoForge 21.2 is already available: `21.2.0-beta`.

This version brings many large technical changes under the hood,
so let's talk about version support for a second.

### Version Support
With Minecraft's new development policy, minor updates often come with large internal technical changes.
These changes are great, and usually benefit modders in the long run.
However, they also fragment the community because not all mods are ported or can be ported immediately.

To avoid that fragmentation, **we recommend that modders continue to actively maintain the 1.21.1 version of their mods until the release of Minecraft 1.22**.
Of course, we encourage modders who have the time to also try out and release their mods for 1.21.2 too,
and we need their feedback to continue improving NeoForge!

Per our usual policy, all Pull Requests now need to be accepted into our `1.21.x` branch which currently targets Minecraft 1.21.2, before a backport can be accepted in the `1.21.1` branch.

As usual, we will have a few weeks of beta where breaking changes are allowed in the 21.2 series.
Remember that we announce breaking changes in the [Dev Announcements channel](https://discord.com/channels/313125603924639766/1187738270386372740) of our [Discord server](https://discord.neoforged.net). Make sure to select the `Dev Announcement Pings` role if you want to be kept up to date with the most important changes!

## Minecraft Changes
Here is a selection of the changes in vanilla 1.21.2 that will affect many modders.

### ID in Block Properties
The Block properties (of type `BlockBehaviour.Properties`) now require the ID of the block to be set:
```diff
- new MyBlock(BlockBehaviour.Properties.of().xxx())
+ new MyBlock(BlockBehaviour.Properties.of().xxx().setId(ResourceKey.create(Registries.BLOCK, resourceLocation)))
```
This is done automatically when using `DeferredRegister.Blocks` with the `registerBlock` method:
```java
BLOCKS.registerBlock("block_name", MyBlock::new, properties -> properties.xxx())
```

### ID in Item Properties
The same is true for Item properties (of type `Item.Properties`).
We suggest using `DeferredRegister.Items` with the `registerItem` method that will take care of this.

By default, items use the `item.namespace.path` translation key.
For block items, remember to call `useBlockDescriptionPrefix()` on the properties to use the `block.namespace.path` translation key:
```diff
// On block items only:
+ properties.useBlockDescriptionPrefix()
```

### Block Entity Type Creation
There is no builder for block entity types anymore. Now, they are constructed directly:
```diff
- BlockEntityType.Builder.of(MyBlockEntity::new, BLOCK1.get(), BLOCK2.get()).build(null)
+ new BlockEntityType<>(MyBlockEntity::new, BLOCK1.get(), BLOCK2.get())
```

### Registry Method Renames
`RegistryAccess.registry` was renamed to `RegistryAccess.lookup`, and similarly for the throwing methods:
```diff
- registryAccess.registryOrThrow(Registries.DAMAGE_TYPE)
+ registryAccess.lookupOrThrow(Registries.DAMAGE_TYPE)
```

`Registry.getHolder` was renamed to `get`, and similarly for the throwing methods:
```diff
- registry.getHolderOrThrow(resourceKey)
+ registry.getOrThrow(resourceKey)
```
Note that it returns a `Holder`.
To retrieve the object directly, use `getValue`:
```diff
- registry.get(resourceLocation)
+ registry.getValue(resourceLocation)
```

### `ServerLevel` Methods
Many methods were moved from `Level` down to `ServerLevel`.
Beware of casts, some of these methods might still be called with client levels too!
In that case, the recommended pattern is to use an `instanceof` check:
```java
if (level instanceof ServerLevel serverLevel) {
    serverLevel.serverSpecificMethod(...);
}
// Continue with more common code
```

### `GuiGraphics.blit`
The `blit` method now takes a `Function<ResourceLocation, RenderType>` as its first parameter.
In most cases, you'll want to pass `RenderType::guiTextured`. For example:
```diff
- guiGraphics.blit(TEXTURE, ...);
+ guiGraphics.blit(RenderType::guiTextured, TEXTURE, ...);
```

### Recipe Changes
The recipe system was largely changed. Notably:
- `Recipe`s are no longer synced with clients.
  - Instead, only `RecipeDisplay`s are.
  - Custom subclasses of `RecipeDisplay` can be created by modders, as long as the `RecipeDisplay.Type` is registered.
  - The `Recipe` interface has a new `List<RecipeDisplay> display()` method to obtain recipe displays.
- The recipe book system was refactored, and is now more accessible to modders.
- `Ingredient`s were changed too:
  - They are generally not synced anymore. Instead, `SlotDisplay`s are, similarly to the `RecipeDisplay`s.
  - The format changed, and now follows the holder set format. For example:
```diff
- { "item": "minecraft:diamond" }
+ "minecraft:diamond"
- { "tag": "c:ingots/copper" }
+ "#c:ingots/cooper"
```
  Custom holder sets are supported too. For example, here is an ingredient that accepts any item:
```json
{ "type": "neoforge:any" }
```
  Custom ingredients are still supported too, using the `neoforge:ingredient_type` key:
```diff
  {
-   "type": "neoforge:compound",
+   "neoforge:ingredient_type": "neoforge:compound",
    "children": [
-     /* old ingredient syntax */
+     /* new ingredient syntax */
    ]
  }
```

## Porting Primer
Finally, here is a more extensive list of changes, courtesy of `@ChampionAsh5357`: https://github.com/ChampionAsh5357/neoforged-github/blob/port/1212-or-122/primers/1.21.2/index.md. <!-- TODO update link -->

Happy porting!
