---
title: "NeoForge 21.4 for Minecraft 1.21.4"
date: 2024-12-03T17:50:00+01:00
draft: false
categories:
- News
- Releases
author: neoforgedteam
summary: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.4, now released for Minecraft 1.21.4."
description: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.4, now released for Minecraft 1.21.4."
---

The first beta release of NeoForge 21.4 for Minecraft 1.21.4 is now available: `21.4.0-beta`.

## Data Generation Splitting
A notable change in Minecraft 1.21.4 is that there are now two data generation entrypoints: one for client assets, and one for server data.
To reflect this, the `GatherDataEvent` has been split into `GatherDataEvent.Client` and `GatherDataEvent.Server`.
To reflect this, the `data` run type in Gradle has been replaced by `clientData` and `serverData` run types.

While split data generation is possible and fully supported, we do not encourage it:
- Data generation would require two separate runs, one for client data and one for server data.
- Data generation would produce two folders with generated resources.

Our recommendation is instead to generate all assets and data in a single `clientData` run.

Here is how to update a Gradle build script (using ModDevGradle) to change the run type to use for datagen:
```diff
  neoForge {
      runs {
          data { // Keep the name as `data` so that the command remains `gradlew runData`
-             data()
+             clientData() // Update run type from `data` to `clientData`
              // Other configuration
          }
      }
  }
```
And here is how to update a Gradle build script using NeoGradle:
```diff
  runs {
-     data {
+     clientData { // The run type is inferred from the run name. The new command will be `gradlew runClientData`
          // Other configuration
      }
  }
```

And here is an example showing how to update the data provider registration code:
```diff
- public void onGatherData(GatherDataEvent event) {
+ public void onGatherData(GatherDataEvent.Client event) {
-     event.addProvider(event.includeClient(), new Provider(...));
+     event.addProvider(new Provider(...));
      // And so on...
  }
```
Naturally, the event listener should only be registered on the client dist.

Note that `event.includeClient()` and `event.includeServer()` have been removed:
modders are already in full control of their datagen runs and can configure which providers they want to run through other means.

## Porting Primer
A porting primer covering Minecraft's changes is available here: https://github.com/ChampionAsh5357/neoforged-github/blob/port/1214/primers/1.21.4/index.md, courtesy of `@ChampionAsh5357`.

We might update this blog post later with more NeoForge-specific changes.

Stay tuned, and happy porting!
