---
title: "NeoForge 21.5 for Minecraft 1.21.5"
date: 2025-03-25T17:50:00+01:00
draft: false
categories:
- News
- Releases
author: neoforgedteam
summary: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.5, now released for Minecraft 1.21.5."
description: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.5, now released for Minecraft 1.21.5."
---

Hello everyone,

The first beta release of NeoForge 21.5 for Minecraft 1.21.5 is now available: `21.5.0-beta`.
And with that the Team wants to hand out a large thanks for all the porting efforts this time around to the entire team, you all did amazing work!

Now lets get into the changes, shall we?

## Changes
This section will draw heavily from the Porting Primer, as well as our porting team.
So bear with us as we show you some of our favorites:

### Weapons, Tools, and Armor: Removing the Redundancies
There have been a lot of updates to weapons, tools, and armor that removes the reliance on the hardcoded base classes of `SwordItem`, `DiggerItem`, and `ArmorItem`, respectively. These have been replaced with their associated data components `WEAPON` for damage, `TOOL` for mining, `ARMOR` for protection, and `BLOCKS_ATTACKS` for shields. Additionally, the missing attributes are usually specified by setting the `ATTRIBUTE_MODIFIERS`, `MAX_DAMAGE`, `MAX_STACK_SIZE`, `DAMAGE`, `REPAIRABLE`, and `ENCHANTABLE`. 
Given that pretty much all the non-specific logic has moved to a data component, these classes have now been completely removed. Use one of the available item property methods or call `Item$Properties#component` directly to set up each item as a weapon, tool, armor, or some combination of the three.

### Extrapolating the Saddles: Equipment Changes

A new `EquipmentSlot` has been added for saddles, which brings with it new changes for generalizing slot logic.

First, rendering an equipment slot for an entity can now be handled as an additional `RenderLayer` called `SimpleEquipmentLayer`. 
This takes in the entity renderer, the `EquipmentLayerRenderer`, the layer type to render, a function to get the `ItemStack` from the entity state, and the adult and baby models.
The renderer will attempt to look up the client info from the associated equippable data component and use that to render the laters as necessary.

Next, instead of having individual lists for each equipment slot on the entity, there is now a general `EntityEquipment` object that holds a delegate to a map of slots to `ItemStack`s. 
This simplifies the storage logic greatly.

Finally, equippables can now specify whether wearing one will contribute to the bonus XP earned when killing a mob by setting `equipOnInteract`.

### Data Component Getters
The data component system can now be represented on arbitrary objects through the use of the DataComponentGetter. 
As the name implies, the getter is responsible for getting the component from the associated type key. 
Both block entities and entities use the DataComponentGetter to allow querying the internal data, such as variant information or custom names. 
They both also have methods for collecting the data components from another holder (via applyImplicitComponents or applyImplicitComponent). 
Block entities also contain a method for collection to another holder via collectImplicitComponents.

### NBT-Tags and Parsing
NBT-Tags have received a rewrite, removing any direct references to types while also sealing and finalizing related classes. 
Getting a value from the tag now returns an Optional-wrapped entry, unless you call one of the get*Or, where you specify the default value. 
Objects, on the other hand, do not take in a default, instead returning an empty variant of the desired tag.


#### Writing with Codecs

`CompoundTag`s now have methods to write and read using a `Codec` or `MapCodec`. For a `Codec`, it will store the serialized data inside the key specified. For a `MapCodec`, it will merge the fields onto the top level tag.

```java
// For some Codec<ExampleObject> CODEC and MapCodec<ExampleObject> MAP_CODEC
// We will also have ExampleObject example
CompoundTag tag = new CompoundTag();

// For a codec
tag.store("example_key", CODEC, example);
Optional<ExampleObject> fromCodec = tag.read("example_key", CODEC);

// For a map codec
tag.store(MAP_CODEC, example);
Optional<ExampleObject> fromMapCodec = tag.read(MAP_CODEC);
```

### Render Pipeline Rework

Rendering an object to the screen, whether through a shader or a RenderType, has been fully or partially reworked, depending on what systems you were using previously. As such, a lot of things need to be reexplained, which a more in-depth look will be below. However, for the people who don't care, here's the TL;DR.

First, shader JSONs no longer exist. This is replaced by a RenderPipeline, which is effectively an in-code substitute. 
Second, the RenderPipelines forcibly make most arbitrarily values into objects. 
For example, instead of storing the blend function mode id, you store a BlendFunction object. 
Similarly, you no longer store or set up the direct texture objects, but instead manage it through a GpuTexture. 
Finally, the VertexBuffer can either draw to the framebuffer by directly passing in the RenderPipeline, updating any necessary uniforms in the consumer, or by passing in the RenderType.

#### Abstracting Open GL
As many are aware, Minecraft has been abstracting away their OpenGL calls and constants, and this release is no different. All of the calls to GL codes, except BufferUsage, have been moved out of object references, to be obtained typically by calling GlConst$toGl. However, with all of the other rendering reworks, there are numerous changes and complexities that require learning an entirely new system, assuming you're not using RenderTypes.

{{< box warning >}}
With these new abstractions in place, we highly suggest that all modders upgrade their own code as far as possible to not use the underlying `GLXY` classes and their methods anymore.
{{< /box >}}

{{< box note >}}
Please be aware that these changes are wide sweaping, however as OpenGL is still the underlying platform, they will largely not cause compile errors, even though you as a modder should probably switch to the new platform.
{{< /box >}}

#### Model rework
Besides the abstracting of OpenGL, there are also significant changes to how models are loaded into the game, and how they are processed.
Examples of this include rewrites to model discovery, parsing and instantiation.
Additionally, NeoForge has aligned its BakedModel framework closer to what vanilla wants to use in the new model part system.

{{< box note >}}
The changes in this area are significant, and would blow up the size of this announcement.
We will post additional information and documentation in the next few days that describe the changes and how to use them.
{{< /box >}}

Coincidentally, or maybe because of the changes, Fabric is also going in this direction. Causing less of a headache for cross-platform modders.

### Client Mod Initialization
Previously for the client, mods where instantiated during the initialization of the client.
This meant that `Minecraft.getInstance()` returned a valid object and was usable to a certain degree.

To better align with vanilla changes to the games options, and with that games keybindings, FML will now instantiate your mods, before it instantiates `Minecraft`.
This was already the case when the server started, there mods where instantiated before the actual server, and now solves two birds with one stone:
- KeyBindings are better configurable and easier to maintainer
- The mental model of how the game starts is easier: Your mod is always created before the game is loaded/started

## NeoForge internal changes
Besides the myriad of user and modder facing changes, there are also some NF internal changes, which modders will not experience:
### Split SourceSets
To prepare for supporting split sourcesets in a modder environment, we needed to split the NeoForge code base first, based on whether the code in question was common, or client only.
This split has now been performed and PRs written for older versions will need to be adapted, especially if they touch client side code.
The player or modder will not experience any change since the produced output, like userdev-, installer and runtime-jars are equal to before the split.

## Porting Primer
A porting primer covering Minecraft's changes is available here: https://github.com/ChampionAsh5357/neoforged-github/blob/port/1215/primers/1.21.5/index.md, courtesy of `@ChampionAsh5357`.

We might update this blog post later with more NeoForge-specific changes.

Stay tuned, and happy porting!
