---
title: "NeoForge 21.6 for Minecraft 1.21.6"
date: 2025-06-17T21:25:00+02:00
draft: false
categories:
- News
- Releases
author: neoforgedteam
summary: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.6, now released for Minecraft 1.21.6."
description: "All you need to know about NeoForge 21.6, now released for Minecraft 1.21.6."
---

The first beta release of NeoForge 21.6 for Minecraft 1.21.6 is now available: `21.6.0-beta`.
This post covers a small subset of the vanilla changes, to get you started with the update!

## `ValueInput`/`ValueOutput`
Many serialization methods were migrated from operating on a `CompoundTag` directly to a new abstraction:
either `ValueInput` when loading data, or `ValueOutput` when saving it.

For example, the `saveAdditional` and `loadAdditional` methods of BlockEntity were changed as follows:
```diff
     @Override
-    protected void saveAdditional(CompoundTag tag, HolderLookup.Provider registries) {
+    protected void saveAdditional(ValueOutput output) {
         // ...
     }

     @Override
-    protected void loadAdditional(CompoundTag tag, HolderLookup.Provider registries) {
+    protected void loadAdditional(ValueInput input) {
         // ...
     }
```

Migration from `CompoundTag` to these classes should be quite straightforward.
Reading the `ValueInput` and `ValueOutput` classes to learn which methods are available is recommended.

Here is one example (saving and loading a `lit` boolean):
```diff
- lit = tag.getBooleanOr("lit", false);
+ lit = valueInput.getBooleanOr("lit", false);

- tag.putBoolean("lit", lit);
+ valueOutput.putBoolean("lit", lit);
```

To create a value input or output, use `TagValueInput.create` and `TagValueOutput.createWithContext/createWithoutContext`.

Note that NeoForge offers a `ValueIOSerializable` interface for objects that can serialize to a `ValueOutput` and deserialize from a `ValueInput`, in case that is useful.
It should be preferred to the old `INBTSerializable` interface.

## GUI rendering changes
There continue to be significant refactors of Minecraft's rendering internals.
In particular, GUI rendering was changed a lot in this release.

**You must specify an alpha value when drawing a string with GuiGraphics, otherwise text will appear invisible (alpha = 0).**
For example:
```diff
- graphics.drawCenteredString(font, /* other parameters */, 0xffffff);
+ graphics.drawCenteredString(font, /* other parameters */, 0xffffffff);
```

Blitting sprites now uses `RenderPipelines.GUI_TEXTURE`:
```diff
- guiGraphics.blitSprite(RenderType::guiTextured, ...);
+ guiGraphics.blitSprite(RenderPipelines.GUI_TEXTURE, ...);
```

There were other very large changes to GUI rendering, that we won't cover in this blog post.

## Finding out what needs to be migrated
A good strategy to migrate your mod is to have a working Minecraft 1.21.5 workspace alongside your in-progress Minecraft 1.21.6 workspace.
This allows you to quickly find out how to update specific pieces of code.
The workflow is as follows:
1. Find a function call that doesn't compile anymore in 1.21.6.
2. Find the same function call in the 1.21.5 workspace that still compiles.
3. Right click the function call, and go to a vanilla usage of the method. _Note_: In IntelliJ, this requires the Minecraft sources to be attached, and the scope for the search needs to be set to `All Places`!
4. Go to the same vanilla usage in 1.21.6, and compare to see how vanilla updated their code.
5. In many cases it is enough to make the same change to your code.

This can also be applied on a larger scale than a function call, for example to learn how tag data generation changed between 1.21.5 and 1.21.6.

## Porting Primer
A porting primer covering a lot more of Minecraft's changes is available [here](https://github.com/neoforged/.github/blob/main/primers/1.21.6/index.md) (courtesy of `@ChampionAsh5357`).

Happy porting!
