---
title: "NeoForge for 26.1 Snapshots"
date: 2025-12-26T17:00:00+01:00
categories:
- News
author: technici4n
summary: "Early NeoForge builds are now available for Minecraft 26.1-snapshot-1."
---

This is a short blog post to announce that we have published early NeoForge builds for the latest Minecraft 26.1 snapshot, `26.1-snapshot-1`.
As of writing, the latest NeoForge version is **`26.1.0.0-alpha.2+snapshot-1`**.

There are strong indications that 26.1 will be the **next stable modding version**, replacing 1.21.1,
so I encourage modders that are still on 1.21.1 to start porting to 1.21.11 and/or 26.1 snapshots already.
If you are porting from 1.21.1, I would recommend reading:
- [The 21.2 release notes](../21.2release/)
- [The 21.4 release notes](../21.4release/)
- [The 21.5 release notes](../21.5release/)
- [The 21.6 release notes](../21.6release/)
- [The 21.9 release notes](../21.9release/)
- [The 21.11 release notes](../21.11release/)

_EDIT: This is a personal educated guess, not an official statement from the NeoForge team as a whole._

## Versioning
Leading up to `26.1`, our published versions will be `26.1.0.0-alpha.<release number>+snapshot-<snapshot number>`,
where `<snapshot number>` indicates the Minecraft snapshot number,
and `<release number>` the release number of NeoForge for that snapshot.
Once Minecraft 26.1 is released, we will release NeoForge `26.1.0.0-beta`
and then continue with `26.1.0.<release number>-beta` as usual.

## Disclaimer
NeoForge versions for snapshots are provided on a best effort basis,
and their availability and quality depends on the available NeoForge maintainers.

Additionally, PRs should continue to target 1.21.11 for the time being,
unless the PR is specific to changes made in 26.1.
We maintainers will regularly be porting changes from the 1.21.11 branch to the 26.1 branch.

## Updating
Currently, only ModDevGradle (MDG) supports this snapshot build, starting from version **2.0.134**. NeoGradle (NG) support should follow soon.

Once you have updated MDG, make sure to update your Gradle version as well. Gradle 9.1.0 or newer is required.
The easiest way to update Gradle is to change the version in the `distributionUrl` property of the `gradle/wrapper/gradle-wrapper.properties` file.

Additionally, these snapshots are now using Java 25, so make sure to update the language version in your Gradle build:
```diff
  java {
      toolchain {
-         languageVersion = JavaLanguageVersion.of(21)
+         languageVersion = JavaLanguageVersion.of(25)
      }
  }
```

Then, you can update the NeoForge version as usual. For example, if you set the version in `gradle.properties`:
```diff
- neoforge_version=21.1.113
+ neoforge_version=26.1.0.0-alpha.1+snapshot-1
```

Finally, Parchment can be removed since Mojang's parameter names are now available thanks to the removal of obfuscation.
For example, if you were setting Parchment via `gradle.properties`, you can delete the corresponding lines:
```diff
- neoForge.parchment.minecraftVersion=1.21
- neoForge.parchment.mappingsVersion=2024.07.28
```
You can also keep it to benefit from additional javadocs.

We expect a number of porting mistakes for these snapshot builds, so please don't hesitate to report any issue you may find. Thanks!
